In the last lectures, I introduced
the digital signature and the blockchain.
Together these form the beginnings of a
system of property rights that depend only
on computer protocols not
on a sovereign authority.
However, they are not sufficient.
For a currency to be valid it must
avoid the double spend attack.
So one solution that we discussed last
time is having authority rest with one
entity, that's this James coin idea.
However, the entire idea of
cryptocurrency is to avoid this type
of centralization however
effective it might be.
So what is distributed consensus?
So first of all,
let's think about the Bitcoin network.
All the Bitcoin network is,
is a bunch of nodes,
just computers that run the reference
version of Bitcoin software.
These nodes are independent.
They are all connected through
potentially multiple steps,
not necessarily directly to each other.
It's a system that has no built-in central
authority, it's fully peer-to-peer.
All of these nodes are equal
in principle to one another.
Now, one goal is to create a protocol
that allows all nodes to agree, but
is that sufficient?
No it is not, because we want the nodes
to agree on something called the truth.
We want them to agree on some
version of the right thing.
Now, in creating a concept
of distributed consensus,
we will assume that nodes can be honest,
or that they can be malicious.
In other words, we do not require
honesty on the part of the nodes.
So here's a definition of
a distributed consensus protocol.
Consider a network of nodes
each receiving a value.
Some are malicious, some honest.
A distributed consensus protocol must
terminate with all honest nodes in
agreement on the value.
And that this value must have
been generated by an honest node.
So with this definition we can see
how distributed consensus applies
the blockchain.
As with the blockchain itself
we will reason recursively.
That is, we're going to assume that the
system starts off in distribute consensus.
Namely all honest nodes are in agreement
on what the blockchain look like.
So we have a set of transactions that
have occurred in the past that form
the blockchain, all honest nodes
are in agreement on that blockchain.
Now, assume a bunch of new transactions
come in and some might be contradictory.
We want to end with a new block added
to the ledger consisting of valid
transactions on which all nodes agree,
that's where we're trying to get.
Now, if we could assume that
even one node were honest, and
if we could assign that
node a stable identity,
we could just write software to send
all transactions through that node.
Then the transactions could be
verified by all the other nodes.
This is like James coin
in the previous lecture.
However, the Bitcoin protocol avoids
assuming that any one node is honest.
And it goes a step further,
it avoids assigning stable
identities to the nodes at all.
So, clearly we cannot prefer
any node over any other node.
So here is an idea, we use randomness.
Randomness is going to be key to
getting to the distributed consensus.
Now before going any further, I want to
review the concept of the hash pointer
because it's so important for
what I'm going to say next.
So remember that a hash pointer
to a block is two things really,
the first is the output of the hash
function applied to that block,
that's called the hash and
a pointer to that block.
So remember what defines a blockchain.
Each block in the blockchain includes
a hash pointer to the previous block.
So I'm going to take a first pass at the
Bitcoin distribute consensus algorithm.
So here's the steps, first of all new
transactions are broadcast to
all the nodes in the system.
Second, each node collects these
transactions into a block.
Third, at a fixed interval a random node
gets to propose the block it's created.
Now what does proposing
a block mean actually?
Well, it means as I said in step two,
collecting the transactions into a block.
But it also means something else,
it also means including a hash
pointer to the previous block.
Then finally, all nodes check the block
to make sure the transactions are valid.
So now this algorithm is going to
repeat itself again and again.
Now let's see how this algorithm
avoids some problems, for
some obvious problems and
then the double spend attack.
First of all, it's not possible to
spend Bitcoins not belonging to
you according to this algorithm,
even though it's decentralized.
Because your signature will not match
the valid signature on the coins.
And it's not possible to deny service
to a certain user whom you don't like.
So if you are a malicious node,
you can say well,
I'm not going to include the transactions
of a whole group of people,
say, that I don't want to do
any business with in my block.
That's fine, all these people
out there just need to wait for
an honest node to get their chance.
So this also avoids some,
more subtle problems,
like the double spend attack that
I introduced in the last lecture.
So, lets review the double spend attack.
Remember MariaCoin.
Remember that Maria transferred the coin
to Sophie, that was a valid transaction.
Sophie transfers the coin to Geoff, but
she also creates a message to
transfer the coin to Mike.
Now, how does this work in
the system I just outlined?
So, Sophie transfer to Geoff is
broadcast to the network of nodes,
and Sophie transfer to Mike is
broadcast to the network of nodes.
Some notes will receive the transfer
to Geoff message first,
some will receive the transfer
to Mike message first.
Now it's usually the policy of honest
nodes to include in their block
the message received first but that's
a norm, it doesn't have to be that way.
Now, some nodes might actually
be a friend of Geoff or
a friend of Mike and
those nodes will be biased.
However, as long as the nodes are running
the reference software they will not be
able to include both because that will
not be a chain of valid ownership.
Now, it's possible that some node could be
completely off the reservation and try and
include both, and
that's the situation that I'm going
to deal within the next lecture.
So for now,
assume that the nodes are sufficiently
honest that they include one or the other.
So now suppose that the randomization
algorithm chooses a no with
the Geoff transaction in it's block.
The block then gets added to
the chain with a Geoff transaction.
Now suppose in the next round the random
algorithm chooses a node with the Mike
transaction in the block.
What we see is a fork in the chain,
because those two transactions
are inconsistent.
It's as if we have a long chain
with two prongs at the end.
So now what happens at the next step?
So another note is randomly chosen.
That note has to pick
which block to accept.
Now what does it mean to accept a block?
It means that it includes a hash pointer
to the previous block in its block.
So it's going to include a hash
pointer either to the Geoff block or
the Mike block and
that's going to narrow to find the chain.
So which will it pick?
We don't know and what's more we don't
care because it can only pick one.
This means that double
spend attack is avoided.
So at that point one fork in
the chain is longer than the other.
Now it is the policy of honest nodes
on Bitcoin to extend the longest fork.
This is a norm of Bitcoin but
nothing in software requires it.
So let's say that the block with
the Geoff transaction has been chosen in
the last round.
That is the block that
gets to be continued, and
the other block,
the other fork is orphaned.
Okay, so now we have a chain with two
prongs, one of them longer than the other.
So if all nodes are honest they will
simply continue with the longest folk and
the other folk will be orphaned.
But what if Mike's friends
all get together and
build on the orphaned folk
containing the transfer to Mike?
Note that this would only require control
of the nodes proposing new blocks.
And then, as long as a sufficient number
of the nodes were controlled the rest of
the honest nodes would follow because it
is the policy to extend the longest fork.
This is why it is so
important that the choice of node be
random in this thought experiment.
Because if the choice of node were
not random then any specific fork
could be extended and
one might not reach agreement.
Of course, it is impossible for
a random node to be chosen,
so this is a conundrum actually this
is not a feasible thought experiment.
And I will discuss the solution to
this conundrum in the next lecture.
For now let's talk about a consequence
of this distributed consensus protocol.
Let's return to our example
of the forking paths.
Recall that once the blockchain forks we
do not know which fork will be continued.
However, once the Geoff
fork has one confirmation,
the policy of honest nodes extending the
longest fork suggests it is more likely to
receive a second confirmation.
And then it is still more likely to
receive a third confirmation, and so on.
As a practical matter, once there
have been several confirmations,
it is very likely that a long term
consensus is formed on a block.
And if one is exchanging goods or
services for Bitcoin,
one can wait until several confirmations
before completing the exchange.
Interestingly though, as a theoretical
matter, one does not know with 100%
certainty that any block becomes
part of the long term consensus.
Because one could always
in principle extend a fork.
There is always some probability,
however minute,
that an orphaned fork
will be picked up again.
So to summarize,
in this lecture I took a fast pass to
Bitcoin's distributed consensus protocol.
Transactions are broadcast to the network,
nodes collect the transactions
into a block,
nodes are chosen at random to propose a
block, we call this a thought experiment.
And in subsequent rounds,
other nodes accept or reject that block,
potentially by accepting other blocks.
Disagreements become forks
in the blockchain, and
short forks are usually abandoned.
It is the policy of honest nodes
to extend the longest fork.
Eventually the system reaches consensus on
one chain, with near certain probability.
There is always some probability,
however minute,
that an abandoned fork
could be picked up again.
Thus, property rights in Bitcoin are
inherently probabilistic, yet ironically,
this may make them more stable in
the sovereign dependent rights we are all
used to.